HM Prison and Probation Service
Workforce Statistics Bulletin
2026-06-30 00:00:00
Annex - Prison and Probation Officer Staffing Levels Against Targets
This document provides Full Time Equivalent (FTE) of Staff in Post for Probation Service Band 4 Probation Officers and Band 3-5 Prison Officers (hours adjusted). These data are supplemented with Target Staffing numbers, and the difference between Target Staffing and Staff in Post. Additionally, numbers of Trainee Probation Officers and other staff with the Professional Qualification in Probation (PQiP) who are not in Probation Officer posts are provided by FTE and Headcount, as at the end of June 2026 (Table 1). A time series of the FTE information by Probation Service regions is provided in Table 2 covering quarters from March 2021 to June 2026. Withdrawal and leaving rates for those undertaking the Professional Qualification in Probation (PQiP) are shown in Table 3 for courses starting since 2016.  A time series of the Band 3-5 Prison Officers (hours adjusted FTE) information by Prison establishment is provided in Table 4 for quarters from March 2023 to June 2026.
These Official Statistics are used to monitor and evaluate the staffing levels of Prison and Probation Officers. If you wish to send any views you may have about these statistics, please use the contact details:
Tracie.Kilbey1@justice.gov.uk
Published: 2026-08-20 00:00:00
https://www.gov.uk/government/collections/national-offender-management-service-workforce-statistics
© Crown Copyright
Produced by the Ministry of Justice
Data Sources and Definitions
General information - Staff in Post
Data Source: Within this annex, the Staff in Post for 30 June 2026 for Probation Officers have been drawn from the most recent HMPPS Workforce Statistics bulletin released on Thursday 20 August 2026.  These data have been extracted from the Single Operating Platform (SOP), an administrative IT system which holds HR information. SOP is a live dynamic system, not designed for use in presenting consistent statistical figures. Although SOP can generate what appear to be historical figures, subsequent updates to details of records on the system will only show the latest position, and not the position as it stood at the time in question.Staff in Post data for Probation Officers are based on the number of staff working in HMPPS and with a contract of employment with HMPPS, excluding those on career breaks, secondment or loan from outside of HMPPS but including staff on secondment or loan into HMPPS. This also excludes staff who were not an active member of the workforce and receiving pay on the relevant date from our Staff in Post (FTE) totals. Staff in Post can be measured on either a headcount or full time equivalent (FTE) basis but FTE provides the most accurate measure of true/actual available resource compared to staff headcount as it takes into account the different working patterns amongst staff as well as joiners, leavers and re-grades. Only FTE is presented for Staff in Post to enable comparison with Target Staffing levels (calculated on an FTE basis). Staff in Post data for Prison Officers have been drawn from SOP. These figures have been hours adjusted using a supplementary data table to account for the different contract lengths available for Prison Officers (see Prison Officer Staffing (Table 4)). As a result, the figures presented in this Annex will vary from Table 15 of the HM Prison and Probation Service workforce statistics release. These figures have also been amended to exclude staff who were not an active member of the workforce and receiving pay on the relevant date.
Definitions
FTE (Full Time Equivalent): This is a measure of the staffing resource available based on contracted hours. Where a member of staff works the standard hours for their grade they are counted as full-time (1 FTE). Staff who work fewer than standard hours are allocated an FTE in proportion to their contracted hours and the standard hours for the grade. Additional work undertaken in addition to standard hours, such as overtime is not taken into account in calculating FTE. FTE is the preferred measure for assessing the net change to the available resource of Staff in Post.
Headcount: The actual number of individuals within the workforce. Both part-time and full-time individuals are counted equally, irrespective of the number of hours worked. Headcount is the preferred measure in counting the population for a basic demographic profile and analysis of equality and diversity data. Headcount is preferred also when looking at the number of individuals joining or leaving the department, as the FTE of an individual at the point of joining or leaving often is not reflective of the FTE the same individual had or will have during the period for which they are in post.
Probation Officers work closely with people across the criminal justice system, victims of crime, charities and the wider community. A Probation Officer will need to successfully complete a Professional Qualification in Probation (PQiP) work-based learning programme while working as a Probation Services Officer (PSO). Once qualified, a Probation Officer post can be applied for in the following areas:Prison – working with high risk offenders during their sentence to prepare them for release (if this is appropriate). Probation Officers work alongside Prison Officers to resettle offenders and work with community teams towards reducing risk in the community upon release.Court – working with a dedicated court team to prepare pre-sentence reports and give advice to the court. They assess the risk the offender may pose to the public and their risk of reoffending. They also advise the courts on any orders or terms that may help or hinder an offender’s rehabilitation.Community – managing offenders on community sentences or those who have been released on licence from prison. They assess risk, implement plans, and liaise with a range of partner agencies to protect the public and promote each individual’s rehabilitation. Prison Officers in this publication relate to Band 3 to 5 Prison Officers which includes Band 3-4 Prison Officers (including specialists), Band 4 Supervising Officers, and Band 5 Custodial Managers.
Further information on the Official Statistics contained within this Annex and the full Workforce Statistics bulletin can be found at:
https://www.gov.uk/government/collections/national-offender-management-service-workforce-statistics
Probation Officers (Tables 1-3)
Target Staffing numbers: The target Full Time Equivalent (FTE) Staff in Post for Probation Service Probation Officers at the end of June 2026. Probation targets reflect the annual refresh to Target Staffing levels made for financial year 2026/27, which also reflects the move from 95% to 100% of the Target Operating Model. The Target Staffing level also reflects in-year changes agreed with the business. The difference is the calculated difference between Target Staffing and Staff in Post.All figures are expressed as Full Time Equivalent (FTE). PQiP Trainee Probation Officers: This is the number of staff undertaking the Professional Qualification in Probation (PQiP) training programme at the end of June 2026. Numbers are expressed as FTE and headcount. Prior to the unification of the Probation Service in June 2021, the numbers exclude recruits previously seconded out to Community Rehabilitation Companies (CRC).Other PQiP Qualified Staff: Staff who have qualified after successfully completing the PQiP training programme and are waiting to take up a substantive Probation Officer post or are not in a Probation Officer post for other reasons. Figures are expressed as FTE and headcount.
Trainee Probation Officer (PQiP) attrition (Table 3)Withdrawal: both those who have left a PQiP course and remained in HMPPS in a non-PQiP role and also those who have left HMPPS completely.PQiP leaver: those who have both simultaneously left a PQiP course and HMPPS.Withdrawal and Leaving rates are only based on courses where the end date has passed and the majority of trainees have either completed the course, withdrawn, or deferred onto another course. These measures calculate the percentage of those who started in relevant PQiP cohorts who left prior to completion of their courses.Data on PQiP leavers have been taken from the PQiP Census, which is a manually completed dataset recording the number of PQiPs in post. This is subject to error as a result of the manual nature with which returns are completed.To note: Leaving rates in the main publication are calculated differently using this definition (and are therefore not comparable): The underlying leaving rate of staff is the number of permanent staff who left HMPPS (other than by Voluntary Early Departure Scheme (VEDS), voluntary redundancy or compulsory redundancy but including early retirees) in the last 12 months divided by the average number of permanent staff in post in the last 12 months; this average is calculated as the mean of the start and ends of the year and the three quarter ends within the year.In Table 3, rates are calculated across the duration of the course, which will be longer than 12 months (generally 15 or 21 months). As a result, we would expect leaving rates here to be greater than the annualised leaving rates in the main release.
Prison Officer Staffing (Table 4)
Target Staffing: The target Full Time Equivalent (FTE) Staff in Post for Prison Service Band 3 to 5 Prison Officers at the end of June 2026. Prisons targets are changed routinely in response to changes requested and agreed by the business.The difference is the calculated difference between Target Staffing and Staff in Post.All figures are expressed as Full Time Equivalent (FTE).
Target Staffing (FTE) for Band 3-5 Prison Officers is set based on a 39-hour contract. Band 3-5 Prison Officers work a combination of 37-, 39- and 41-hour contracts and in the main HMPPS Workforce Quarterly Statistics release, all individuals who work full time relative to their respective contract are considered to be 1 FTE. To make a meaningful comparison between Target Staffing and Staff in Post for Prison Officers, this Annex presents an hours adjusted Staff in Post (FTE) which utilises the Single Operating Platform (SOP) as the primary data source (linked to a separate finance table to extract contracted hours) and counts someone working full time on a 37-hour contract as 0.95 FTE / a 39-hour contract as 1 FTE and a 41-hour contract as 1.05 FTE.
In Prison establishments, Payment Plus and Detached Duty are key methods of increasing available resource in the short-term and redistributing staff from where there is a surplus. It would be too challenging to clearly and concisely present temporary staffing measures in this Annex, but it is important to note that both measures are routinely used to reduce the 'difference'.
Notes
This worksheet contains two columns. The first column is the note number and the second column is a description of the note.
Note number Note text
[1] As with all HR databases, extracts are taken at a fixed point in time to ensure consistency of reporting. However, the database itself is dynamic and where updates to the database are made late, subsequent to the taking of the extract, these updates will not be reflected in figures produced by the extract. For this reason, HR data are unlikely to be precisely accurate.
[2] The Target Staffing level was updated for the 2026/27 financial year. The Target Staffing level increased from 2025/26 to reflect the annual step change in Target Staffing and reflecting the current Target Operating Model.
[3] Negative figures indicate that the FTE for Staff in Post is less than the Target Staffing level.
[4] Staff successfully qualified on the PQiP training course but waiting to take up a substantive Probation Officer post or are not in a Probation Officer post for other reasons.
[5] Trainee Probation Officers (PQiPs) includes Trainee Probation Officers (PQiPs) that should have qualified by now according to their original course end date but have deferred their training.
[6] A small number of staff in probation grades work in other parts of HMPPS and a small number of staff in the Probation Service do not have probation grades.
[7] Staff in Post data excludes (from the March 2024 release onwards) all staff who were not an active member of the workforce and receiving pay on the relevant date from our Staff in Post (FTE) totals. Please see Methodological Changes in main publication and the Technical Guide.
[8] From April 2026, PDU structures changed for North West with the merge of East Cheshire and West Cheshire to Cheshire East and West, and the merge of Blackburn and East Lancashire to Pennine Lancashire. From April 2025, PDU structures changed for Greater Manchester following the creation of PDU Stockport and Tameside and PDU Salford and Trafford, and the closure of PDU Salford and PDU Stockport and Trafford. From April 2025, PDU structures have changed for Kent, Surrey and Sussex , with the split of PDU West Kent into PDU North Kent and PDU Mid Kent. From December 2024, PDU structures changed for West Midlands, with the split of PDU Staffordshire North and South into PDU Staffordshire North and PDU Staffordshire South.
[9] The unification of the Probation Service in June 2021 included the transfer of Community Rehabilitation Company (CRC) staff into HMPPS.
[10] Target staffing not available due to the unification of the Probation Service in June 2021.
[11] Includes staff that were previously seconded to CRCs and also former CRC staff who have transferred to HMPPS as result of the unification of the Probation Service in June 2021. These groups of staff were excluded from the figures prior to June 2021.
[12] The Target Staffing level represented the interim position following the unification of the Probation Service in June 2021.
[13] The Target Staffing level for 2022/23 increased from 2021/22 to reflect changing ways of working and delivering Probation Services as it moves towards the new Target Operating Model.
[14] The Target Staffing level for 2023/24 increased from 2022/23 to reflect changing ways of working and delivering Probation Services as it moves towards the new Target Operating Model.
[15] The Target Staffing level for 2025/26 increased from 2024/25 to reflect the annual step change in Target Staffing and reflecting the current Target Operating Model.
[16] Staff in Post figures for previous quarters are not routinely updated when a new release is produced. However, for the December 2023 release, Staff in Post (FTE) figures for December 2023 were updated to include Band 4 Quality Development Officers, who have been re-mapped to Band 4 Probation Officers. For December 2023, this meant an increase of around 60 FTE. As part of this release, figures for all previous quarters were updated to reflect the regrade.
[17] Historic data from the March 2024 release onwards may not match previous releases as we are now excluding all staff who were not an active member of the workforce and receiving pay on the relevant date from our staff in post counts. Please see Methodological Changes in main publication and the Technical Guide.
[18] The Target Staffing for probation service grades in HMPPS HQ fell between June 2023 and September 2023 partly due to the regrading of some Probation Officer posts to Senior Probation Officers.
[19] Since the June 2024 release, Probation Officer Staff in Post figures for all quarters have been increased to include the job ‘Practice Tutor Assessor’. This was previously considered under the grade ‘Band 4 Other’ but has been amended as the role requires completion of the Professional Qualification in Probation. Target Staffing figures have not been adjusted as these already account for those undertaking this job.
[20] Prior to June 2022, Approved Premises, except for those in Wales Probation Service, were included under HMPPS HQ following their transition from the Probation Service on 30 November 2019. The Target Staffing level for Approved Premises in HMPPS HQ was reviewed and aligned in October 2021. Previously, their Target Staffing remained under the Probation Service regions. From June 2022, figures for Approved Premises are shown separately from HMPPS HQ.
[21] Around 180 FTE of Target Staffing for Sexual Offending Programmes was transferred from Probation Officer to Probation Services Officer (as of the September 2024 release).
[22] The number of 'Other Qualified Staff' was particularly high for December 2024 as a considerable number of PQiPs completed their training just before Christmas but were not in post in a Probation Officer role by the end of the month. Many of these individuals had taken up Probation Officer roles by the time of the March 2025 release.
[23] Target Staffing prior to June 2021 represented the current requirements and did not include anticipated changes in the new probation unified model for England in 2021.
[24] Prior to unification, Trainee Probation Officers (PQiPs) figures excluded staff seconded to CRCs.
[25] A new Stakeholder Engagement North West was created in November 2020 under North West Probation Service. The previous Stakeholder Engagement North West, under Greater Manchester Probation Service, was renamed. The main HMPPS Workforce Statistics Bulletin counts the previous Stakeholder Engagement North West under North West Probation Service prior to December 2020. As of December 2023, historic data in the Prison and Probation Officer Recruitment Annex has been aligned in the same way.
[26] The Target Staffing level has been updated for the 2025/26 financial year. The Target Staffing level increased from 2024/25 to reflect the annual step change in Target Staffing and reflecting the current Target Operating Model
[27] Between June and September 2025, the Probation Officer / Probation Services Officer Target Staffing ratio was re-balanced to reflect the Tier C (medium risk) caseload profile; enabling more cases to be appropriately managed by Probation Services Officers.
[28] For 2016/17 and 2017/18, there were only 15 month courses. The 21 month courses were introduced from 2018/19 and so data from this year will include all 15-month and 21-month courses. The 13-month PSO pathway pilot was introduced in 2020/21 and was only run on one occasion.
[29] Professional Qualification in Probation (PQiP) trainees are Trainee Probation Officers.
[30] Although all courses that started in 2022/23 and 2023/24 have now concluded, some trainees have been delayed. Delayed candidates have not withdrawn or deferred but may not have completed the course yet (and could still drop out). As a result of this, historic attrition rates can change in future quarters.
[31] Some courses that started in 2024/25 are yet to conclude, therefore attrition rates are likely to change in future releases.
[32] A fully completed course means that the course end date has passed and the majority of trainees have either completed the course, withdrawn, or deferred onto another course.
[33] Numbers are subject to revision in future publications based on data recorded in the PQiP Census.
[34] If someone has deferred onto a later course, we will include them as part of the course they have deferred onto.
[35] Withdrawal rate refers to both those who have left a PQiP course and remained in HMPPS in a non-PQiP role and also those who have left HMPPS completely.
[36] Leaving rate refers to those who have both simultaneously left a PQiP course and HMPPS.
[37] Please note that data for completed courses are subject to change if data entries are amended beyond the point of course completion.
[38] This includes internal Probation Service candidates that were successful during the PQiP recruitment and have become Trainee Probation Officers.
[39] This includes staff that have withdrawn from the training programme or have left the Probation Service since starting their training.
[40] This excludes those that have deferred from an earlier course.
[41] Staff in Post (FTE) is hours adjusted for comparability with Target Staffing (FTE), which is set on the basis of a 39-hour working week for a Prison Officer.
[42] The Target Staffing figures are set on a site-specific basis and vary in size.
[43] When looking at the difference, it is important to note that surpluses and deficits could be netting off between grades (i.e. between Band 3, Band 4 and Band 5).
[44] Only HMPPS public sector prison establishments are included in the data. This excludes privately managed prisons.
[45] Target Staffing levels cannot be used to directly calculate vacancies due to the discretion governors have to change establishment level staffing requirements through Governors' freedoms.
[46] Due to slight differences in the way the jobs are mapped for Band 3-5 Prison Officer in the main publication compared with the Annex, this may lead to small differences in the staff in post figures between the main publication and those in the annex.
[47] Lowdham Grange transferred from private to public management on the 1st August 2024. Target Staffing was not available for this establishment as at the September 2024 publication but has been included from the December 2024 publication. Please see the main publication for the Staff in Post figures for September 2024.
[48] Staff in Post and Target Staffing (FTE) have both increased for December 2024 due to the addition of Lowdham Grange to the table. This has also impacted the Difference (FTE). Caution is advised when comparing the totals between the September 2024 and December 2024 columns due to the addition of this establishment.
[49] In June 2024 Cookham Wood was repurposed as an adult prison for category C males but this change was not reflected in the June 2024 publication. This change has now been made to all historical data from the September 2024 publication onwards.
[50] Band 3-5 Officers includes Band 3-4 Prison Officers (including specialists), Band 4 Supervising Officers, and Band 5 Custodial Managers.
[51] The Target Staffing level changes regularly in response to Governors' freedoms and other changes requested by the business.
[52] The Youth Custody Service (YCS), created in April 2017 to oversee day-to-day management of the under 18s young people’s estate. Central YCS units are categorised within HQ and Frontline Support and the Youth Custody Estate includes the following young offender institutions: Feltham, Werrington, and Wetherby. The YCS also initially included the Medway Secure Training Centre which closed in March 2020.
[53] At times, HMPPS over-recruits in certain prisons or regions as this gives greater system wide resilience and where prisons are not at their Target Staffing level, these are routinely supplemented (e.g., by using Payment Plus, a form of overtime) which is not accounted for in the data provided.
[54] Detached duty is a long-standing mechanism used to deploy staff from one prison or region to support another. This is not reflected in the Staff in Post figures provided.
[55] Target Staffing is the number of staff required to run an optimal regime in each prison. This level is greater than the minimum number of staff required for a prison to operate safely, and includes allowances for staff taking leave, being off sick or being on training.
[56] Staff in Post figures for Dartmoor are low due to the ongoing management of radon exposure at the prison. This has led to the closure of the prison, the redeployment of staff and transfer of prisoners to other establishments.
[57] Since June 2026, Hollesley Bay and Warren Hill prisons have been merged into a single prison called Hollesley on the HR reporting system. For this annex however, June 2026 figures for Hollesley Bay includes figures for Warren Hill, except for a single employee that was yet to be transferred to the Hollesley cost centre as at the end of June 2026.