HM Prison and Probation Service
Workforce Statistics Bulletin
2026-06-30 00:00:00
Annex - Prison and Probation Officer Staffing Levels Against Targets
This document provides Full Time Equivalent (FTE) of Staff in Post for Probation Service Band 4 Probation Officers and Band 3-5 Prison Officers (hours adjusted). These data are supplemented with Target Staffing numbers, and the difference between Target Staffing and Staff in Post. Additionally, numbers of Trainee Probation Officers and other staff with the Professional Qualification in Probation (PQiP) who are not in Probation Officer posts are provided by FTE and Headcount, as at the end of June 2026 (Table 1). A time series of the FTE information by Probation Service regions is provided in Table 2 covering quarters from March 2021 to June 2026. Withdrawal and leaving rates for those undertaking the Professional Qualification in Probation (PQiP) are shown in Table 3 for courses starting since 2016.  A time series of the Band 3-5 Prison Officers (hours adjusted FTE) information by Prison establishment is provided in Table 4 for quarters from March 2023 to June 2026.
These Official Statistics are used to monitor and evaluate the staffing levels of Prison and Probation Officers. If you wish to send any views you may have about these statistics, please use the contact details:
Tracie.Kilbey1@justice.gov.uk
Published: 2026-08-20 00:00:00
https://www.gov.uk/government/collections/national-offender-management-service-workforce-statistics
© Crown Copyright
Produced by the Ministry of Justice
Data Sources and Definitions
General information - Staff in Post
Data Source: Within this annex, the Staff in Post for 30 June 2026 for Probation Officers have been drawn from the most recent HMPPS Workforce Statistics bulletin released on Thursday 20 August 2026.  These data have been extracted from the Single Operating Platform (SOP), an administrative IT system which holds HR information. SOP is a live dynamic system, not designed for use in presenting consistent statistical figures. Although SOP can generate what appear to be historical figures, subsequent updates to details of records on the system will only show the latest position, and not the position as it stood at the time in question.Staff in Post data for Probation Officers are based on the number of staff working in HMPPS and with a contract of employment with HMPPS, excluding those on career breaks, secondment or loan from outside of HMPPS but including staff on secondment or loan into HMPPS. This also excludes staff who were not an active member of the workforce and receiving pay on the relevant date from our Staff in Post (FTE) totals. Staff in Post can be measured on either a headcount or full time equivalent (FTE) basis but FTE provides the most accurate measure of true/actual available resource compared to staff headcount as it takes into account the different working patterns amongst staff as well as joiners, leavers and re-grades. Only FTE is presented for Staff in Post to enable comparison with Target Staffing levels (calculated on an FTE basis). Staff in Post data for Prison Officers have been drawn from SOP. These figures have been hours adjusted using a supplementary data table to account for the different contract lengths available for Prison Officers (see Prison Officer Staffing (Table 4)). As a result, the figures presented in this Annex will vary from Table 15 of the HM Prison and Probation Service workforce statistics release. These figures have also been amended to exclude staff who were not an active member of the workforce and receiving pay on the relevant date.
Definitions
FTE (Full Time Equivalent): This is a measure of the staffing resource available based on contracted hours. Where a member of staff works the standard hours for their grade they are counted as full-time (1 FTE). Staff who work fewer than standard hours are allocated an FTE in proportion to their contracted hours and the standard hours for the grade. Additional work undertaken in addition to standard hours, such as overtime is not taken into account in calculating FTE. FTE is the preferred measure for assessing the net change to the available resource of Staff in Post.
Headcount: The actual number of individuals within the workforce. Both part-time and full-time individuals are counted equally, irrespective of the number of hours worked. Headcount is the preferred measure in counting the population for a basic demographic profile and analysis of equality and diversity data. Headcount is preferred also when looking at the number of individuals joining or leaving the department, as the FTE of an individual at the point of joining or leaving often is not reflective of the FTE the same individual had or will have during the period for which they are in post.
Probation Officers work closely with people across the criminal justice system, victims of crime, charities and the wider community. A Probation Officer will need to successfully complete a Professional Qualification in Probation (PQiP) work-based learning programme while working as a Probation Services Officer (PSO). Once qualified, a Probation Officer post can be applied for in the following areas:Prison – working with high risk offenders during their sentence to prepare them for release (if this is appropriate). Probation Officers work alongside Prison Officers to resettle offenders and work with community teams towards reducing risk in the community upon release.Court – working with a dedicated court team to prepare pre-sentence reports and give advice to the court. They assess the risk the offender may pose to the public and their risk of reoffending. They also advise the courts on any orders or terms that may help or hinder an offender’s rehabilitation.Community – managing offenders on community sentences or those who have been released on licence from prison. They assess risk, implement plans, and liaise with a range of partner agencies to protect the public and promote each individual’s rehabilitation. Prison Officers in this publication relate to Band 3 to 5 Prison Officers which includes Band 3-4 Prison Officers (including specialists), Band 4 Supervising Officers, and Band 5 Custodial Managers.
Further information on the Official Statistics contained within this Annex and the full Workforce Statistics bulletin can be found at:
https://www.gov.uk/government/collections/national-offender-management-service-workforce-statistics
Probation Officers (Tables 1-3)
Target Staffing numbers: The target Full Time Equivalent (FTE) Staff in Post for Probation Service Probation Officers at the end of June 2026. Probation targets reflect the annual refresh to Target Staffing levels made for financial year 2026/27, which also reflects the move from 95% to 100% of the Target Operating Model. The Target Staffing level also reflects in-year changes agreed with the business. The difference is the calculated difference between Target Staffing and Staff in Post.All figures are expressed as Full Time Equivalent (FTE). PQiP Trainee Probation Officers: This is the number of staff undertaking the Professional Qualification in Probation (PQiP) training programme at the end of June 2026. Numbers are expressed as FTE and headcount. Prior to the unification of the Probation Service in June 2021, the numbers exclude recruits previously seconded out to Community Rehabilitation Companies (CRC).Other PQiP Qualified Staff: Staff who have qualified after successfully completing the PQiP training programme and are waiting to take up a substantive Probation Officer post or are not in a Probation Officer post for other reasons. Figures are expressed as FTE and headcount.
Trainee Probation Officer (PQiP) attrition (Table 3)Withdrawal: both those who have left a PQiP course and remained in HMPPS in a non-PQiP role and also those who have left HMPPS completely.PQiP leaver: those who have both simultaneously left a PQiP course and HMPPS.Withdrawal and Leaving rates are only based on courses where the end date has passed and the majority of trainees have either completed the course, withdrawn, or deferred onto another course. These measures calculate the percentage of those who started in relevant PQiP cohorts who left prior to completion of their courses.Data on PQiP leavers have been taken from the PQiP Census, which is a manually completed dataset recording the number of PQiPs in post. This is subject to error as a result of the manual nature with which returns are completed.To note: Leaving rates in the main publication are calculated differently using this definition (and are therefore not comparable): The underlying leaving rate of staff is the number of permanent staff who left HMPPS (other than by Voluntary Early Departure Scheme (VEDS), voluntary redundancy or compulsory redundancy but including early retirees) in the last 12 months divided by the average number of permanent staff in post in the last 12 months; this average is calculated as the mean of the start and ends of the year and the three quarter ends within the year.In Table 3, rates are calculated across the duration of the course, which will be longer than 12 months (generally 15 or 21 months). As a result, we would expect leaving rates here to be greater than the annualised leaving rates in the main release.
Prison Officer Staffing (Table 4)
Target Staffing: The target Full Time Equivalent (FTE) Staff in Post for Prison Service Band 3 to 5 Prison Officers at the end of June 2026. Prisons targets are changed routinely in response to changes requested and agreed by the business.The difference is the calculated difference between Target Staffing and Staff in Post.All figures are expressed as Full Time Equivalent (FTE).
Target Staffing (FTE) for Band 3-5 Prison Officers is set based on a 39-hour contract. Band 3-5 Prison Officers work a combination of 37-, 39- and 41-hour contracts and in the main HMPPS Workforce Quarterly Statistics release, all individuals who work full time relative to their respective contract are considered to be 1 FTE. To make a meaningful comparison between Target Staffing and Staff in Post for Prison Officers, this Annex presents an hours adjusted Staff in Post (FTE) which utilises the Single Operating Platform (SOP) as the primary data source (linked to a separate finance table to extract contracted hours) and counts someone working full time on a 37-hour contract as 0.95 FTE / a 39-hour contract as 1 FTE and a 41-hour contract as 1.05 FTE.
In Prison establishments, Payment Plus and Detached Duty are key methods of increasing available resource in the short-term and redistributing staff from where there is a surplus. It would be too challenging to clearly and concisely present temporary staffing measures in this Annex, but it is important to note that both measures are routinely used to reduce the 'difference'.