Safety in Custody Statistics: Assaults annual tables, 2000 - 2025
Publication details
These tables are published as part of the Safety in Custody Statistics Bulletin
For the main report please go to:
https://www.gov.uk/government/collections/safety-in-custody-statistics (opens in new window)
Geographical coverage:
All tables are for England and Wales.
Data sources and quality:
These figures have been drawn from the HMPPS Incident Reporting System. Care is taken when processing and analysing the returns but the detail collected is subject to the inaccuracies inherent in any large scale recording system. Although the figures are shown to the last case (for incidents) or to the last individual, the figures may not be accurate to that level.
Symbols and conventions
[..] Figures suppressed due to 2 or less incidents. Additional cells have also been suppressed to prevent the calculation of suppressed values. As a result, totals may not equal the sum of individual cells.
[0] Nil or less than half the final digit shown
[-] Not applicable
(p) Provisional data
(r) Revised data
Use of notes
Some tables refer to notes. When notes are mentioned, the note marker is presented in square brackets. The note text can be found in the 'Notes' table.
Publication schedule
This release was published on Thursday 30 April 2026 at 9:30am.
Publication of 2026 figures will be in April 2027. Provisional quarterly updates are published in July, October and January.
Additional resources
Figures include incidents at HMPPS operated Immigration Removal Centres and during contracted out escorts (including contracted out escort of prisoners from STCs). Figures do not include incidents at Medway STC. For more information on Secure Training Centres, please see Youth justice annual statistics via the following link:
https://www.gov.uk/government/collections/youth-justice-statistics (opens in new window)
Figures from April 2018 onwards exclude incidents occurring within the youth estate. Figures for incidents occurring within the youth estate are published within the ‘Safety in the children and young people secure estate’ statistics bulletin via the following link:
https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/safety-in-the-children-and-young-people-secure-estate-update-to-december-2020 (opens in new window)
For additional information on prisons, see the latest HM Inspector of Prisons inspection reports via the following link:
http://www.justice.gov.uk/publications/inspectorate-reports/hmi-prisons/prison-and-yoi (opens in new window)
Media enquiries
Contact information for media enquiries can be found on the GOV.UK website via the following link:
https://www.gov.uk/government/organisations/ministry-of-justice/about/media-enquiries (opens in new window)
Copyright
Crown copyright Produced by the Ministry of Justice
Notes
This worksheet contains one table.
Link to Contents tab
Note number Note text
[note 1] Figures include incidents at HMPPS operated Immigration Removal Centres and during contracted out escorts. Figures do not include incidents at Medway STC.
[note 2] Figures from April 2018 onwards exclude incidents occurring within the youth estate, so figures for 2018 are not comparable with the years before or after, due to youth estate incidents being included in part of the year, from January to April 2018. The youth estate includes incidents occurring within Cookham Wood (up to July 2024, after which it changed to Category C), Werrington and Wetherby, as well as the youth wing at Feltham and Parc. Prior to April 2018 these figures were collected via manual returns, so it is not possible to split out all youth estate incidents up to March 2018. Figures for incidents occurring within the youth estate are published within the ‘Safety in the Children and Young People Secure Estate’ statistics bulletin via the following link - https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/announcements/safety-in-the-youth-secure-estate-bulletin
[note 3] In prisons, as in the community, it is not possible to count assault incidents with absolute accuracy. In prison custody, however, such incidents are more likely to be detected and counted. Care needs to be taken when comparing figures shown here with other sources where data may be less complete. Prison violence can be measured in a number of ways. This report focuses on assault incidents including fights, and it is expected that all assaults, including fights, should be reported whether or not there was an injury. A new Key Performance Indicator for serious assaults was introduced in 2003/04 and as a result reporting of all assault incidents improved. Reported incidents before 2005 are therefore not directly comparable with later figures. In particular, although figures for 2000 to 2002 have been included they are under reported by modern standards.
[note 4] Refinements were made to the recording of Assaults in April 2017. The changes are backward compatible with the previous system and while the overall reporting of assaults is not expected to be impacted, it may impact the reporting of various information regarding the assault. The change modified how Prisoner-on-Officer and Prisoner-on-Other are recorded, as well as breakdowns on assault incidents involving weapons, spitting, injuries, concussion, and hospital attendance. For more information please refer to the Guide to Safety in Custody Statistics.
[note 5] Sex refers to the type of establishment. In general, the reported sex of the people involved in the assault will be the same as the type of establishment. Figures relating to the number of prisoners in the male or female estate may not reflect the reported sex of the prisoner. In a minority of cases - typically assaults on staff - the reported sex may be different to the establishment type. Incidents occurring within escort areas are based on the reported sex of the prisoner.
[note 6] Annual assault rates are derived by 1,000 x (number of incidents in year)/(average monthly population for year). Prison population figures are from the 'Offender Management' statistics quarterly bulletin and are averaged across 12 months.
[note 7] Prisoner on prisoner assaults are a subset of all assault incidents. Assaults on staff are a subset of all assault incidents. Assaults on staff is not the same as 'prisoner on officer' assaults.
[note 8] Prisoners may be involved in assault incidents in a number of ways e.g. helping staff, were present at scene etc. The prisoner involvements in this table have been limited to the four main roles of those most directly involved.
[note 9] Assailants refer to assault incidents in which there is a clear aggressor and victim. Such incidents can arise from offences of GBH and ABH. Fighters refer to assault incidents in which there is no clear aggressor or victim. Such cases can arise from offences of affray.
[note 10] Figures for the 15-17 age group include incidents by prisoners in the youth estate that occurred within escort areas.
[note 11] "Not recorded/unknown" refers to cases in which some details of prisoner assailants, fighters or victims are missing. This can occur for operational reasons if, for some reason, prisoner details were either not available or not recorded in full at the time of an incident. The unknown age category refers to when the age of a prisoner is not known, but the prisoner involved is known.
[note 12] Care needs to be taken when interpreting numbers of assault incidents in the early days in the current prison. The number of incidents in a precise 24 hour time slot may not be accurate due to uncertainty in the exact time of incident.
[note 13] The figures in these tables were previously based on the sentence type information for each prisoner as at the time the data was extracted, which in some cases was up to a year after the date of the incident. The methodology for the extract has been improved to now pick up the sentence type information for each prisoner as at the time of the incident, with the update having been applied from 2022 onwards.
[note 14] An indeterminate sentence of Imprisonment for Public Protection (IPP) was introduced in 2005. It was intended for high risk prisoners considered ‘dangerous’ but whose offence did not merit a life sentence. The number of prisoners held on this sentence increased initially and the increase was offset by reductions elsewhere.
[note 15] "Recalls" refers to when an assailants, fighter, or victim was a recalled prisoner, including those that were recalled IPP prisoners. This subset has been split out, from 2022 onwards, in the subsequent row ("of which, imprisonment for Public Protection"). Separate to this is the "Imprisonment for Public Protection" subset of "Indeterminate Sentences", which only includes unreleased IPP prisoners. Therefore, the sum of these two subsets will provide total assailants/fighters/victims that were IPP prisoners.
[note 16] Ethnicity is based on self reporting by prisoners and has not been independently validated. It is based on recorded ethnicity within the prison administrative system.
[note 17] The numbers in each category are based on the recorded ethnicity of an individual when the assault incident took place. As a result, individuals may appear in more than one category during a year.
[note 18] Prior to 2013, those with Chinese ethnicity were counted either in "Asian or Asian British" or "Other" depending on the code selected. Figures have been updated to include Chinese under "Asian or Asian British".
[note 19] The "Mixed" ethnicity category was introduced in 2003 and was therefore not applicable from 2000 to 2002. Most prisoner in this category would have been in the "Other" category. Care needs to be taken when comparing ethnicity splits in 2003 and earlier with more recent figures.
[note 20] Nationality is based on self-reporting by prisoners and has not been independently verified. It is based on recorded nationality within the prison administrative system.
[note 21] The numbers in each category are based on the recorded nationality of an individual when the assault incident took place. As a result, individuals may appear in more than one category during a year.
[note 22] The European Economic Area (EEA). For definition of the countries, please see: https://www.gov.uk/eu-eea
[note 23] The figures by type of assault only record one type of assault per incident, with the "Prisoner-on-Prisoner" option taking precedence. This means that an assault by a prisoner on both another prisoner and a member of staff must be recorded as "Prisoner-on-Prisoner", so "Prisoner-on-Staff" does not include all assaults on staff. "Prisoner-on-Other" includes assaults by a prisoner that were not on either a prisoner or a member of prison staff, e.g. a prison visitor (although a member of prison staff may subsequently be assaulted while intervening), and "Other" includes all assaults by anyone other than a prisoner. Prior to 2018 "Prisoner-on-Officer" did not exist as an option in the same format within the reporting system.
[note 24] These figures count the number of incidents where an assault occurred, one assault incident can involve an assault against multiple individuals. The prisoner-on-prisoner assaults can include an assault where both a prisoner and a member of staff were assaulted. The prisoner-on-staff assaults can include assaults where either multiple staff were assaulted or where more than one different type of staff were assaulted.
[note 25] The figures for an assault on staff include a breakdown by type of staff member assaulted, and it is possible to select more than one type of staff member per incident. Figures for "Assault on staff - prison officer" include incidents where there was an assault on an operation band 3-5 prison staff. Figures for "Assault on staff - other" include incidents where a staff member other than a prison officer was assaulted, and includes assaults on other operational staff, non-operational staff, and non-directly employed staff. This is only counted once per incident so if a prisoner officer and another member of staff are assaulted in the same incident this is counted in the prison officer row.
[note 26] A serious assault incident covering multiple assault types (for example, a prisoner-on-prisoner assault where a member of staff was assaulted), does not record which party within the incident was seriously assaulted, and the incident will be counted as serious in each category it falls into.
[note 27] This table was updated to include a more detailed breakdown by type of assault. Figures showing the number of incidents on staff, and by type of staff, have been updated back to 2018, but it is not possible to provide a longer time series.
[note 28] Sexual assault incidents account for less than 2% of all assault incidents. Determination of whether a particular assault should be classified as sexual is guided by the wishes of the victim. A small proportion of those reported here will refer to incidents that occurred outside prison custody and some will be unproven allegations. All sexual assaults are considered to be a serious assault. The classification breakdown identifies the type of assault; however, some incidents involve multiple assaults, and the incident type does not necessarily indicate who was sexually assaulted.
[note 29] The majority of assault incidents do not involve weapons. Of those that do, most involve items that may be found to hand. Relatively few involve a designed for purpose weapon.
[note 30] From 2013 onwards, the counting rules for weapons used in assaults are based on responses to a range of questions asked at the time of reporting on the Incident Reporting System, allowing for multiple weapon types to be associated with a single incident. Prior to this, a hierachical logic was applied to reduce the number of weapons associated with an incident to one. As only one weapon type was associated to each incident, breakdowns of weapon type from before 2012 are not comparable to later figures. From 2013 onwards the 'weapon type' figures include all types of weapon used within an individual assault incident, and are presented together with an overall total which shows the number of unique assault incidents where a weapon was used, plus totals for the number of unique assault incidents which included 'instrument' and 'non-instrument' weapons. Each weapon type is only counted once per unique incident, this is a count of incidents rather than weapons.
[note 31] Firearms include objects designed or adapted to expel a projectile by the action of an explosion for the discharge of any bullet, noxious liquid gas or other missile. This includes but is not limited to PAVA, stun guns, electric shock devices.
[note 32] The "Other" category contains a wide range of items that can be found to hand but cannot easily be classified as one of the other categories, together with a proportion of items that could be classified in one of the existing categories but were reported as "Other". This table was updated in the 2025 publication to remove a breakdown for biting, which is commonly recorded in "Other" and was previously presented as a subset of this category, because this was inferred based on a free text field and was subject to errors with data entry and identification.
[note 33] Age group classifications of assault incidents are based on the age of the prisoners involved. Where these are not known the incident is classified based on the type of establishments where the incidents took place. In most cases the assailant will be in the specified age range. In a small proportion of cases this might not be the case e.g. a member of staff working in a YOI may have been assaulted by an adult visitor.
[note 34] Injuries are based on initial assessment by prison staff and should not be treated as confirmed clinical diagnoses.
[note 35] Serious injuries refers to the number of different types of serious injuries that were present in assault incidents. Prior to 2013 the numbers in this table count one injury type per incident only. Figures from 2013 and onwards includes all injury types recorded and therefore the sum of all injuries will be more than the number of incidents with injuries. The 2013 figures have been produced under both counting methods to aid comparison.
[note 36] As with serious injuries, more than one type of minor injury can occur in a single incident. Prior to 2013 the numbers in this table count one injury type per incident only. Figures from 2013 and onwards includes all injury types recorded and therefore the sum of all injuries will be more than the number of incidents with injuries. The 2013 figures have been produced under both counting methods to aid comparison.
[note 37] The in-patient hospital attendances in this table refer to those arising immediately from assault incidents. They do not include other types of hospital attendance such as A&E nor do they include any subsequent hospital visits that may be required to continue treatment.
[note 38] An assault incident requiring hospitalisation does not only reflect the seriousness of the incident. This also depends on the healthcare facilities at the establishment, which vary across the estate.
[note 39] The question relating to treatment for concussion/internal injuries was integrated into IT systems some years ago. The numbers are based on initial assessment by prison staff but should not be treated as confirmed clinical diagnoses. Although not specifically recorded as being treated it may be assumed that the majority of injuries mentioned in Table 3.12 will have involved some treatment.
[note 40] The list here shows years of opening/closing and major re-roles of establishments. However, prisons are constantly evolving as new wings open and old ones close for refurbishment. Even a relatively minor change in a prison has the potential to affect the distribution of safer custody risk, for example, the opening or closing of a special unit. When interpreting figures for particular establishments there is no substitute for knowledge of local factors likely to affect the distribution of risk. For additional information on prisons, see the latest HM Inspector of Prisons inspection reports which can be found here: http://www.justice.gov.uk/publications/inspectorate-reports/hmi-prisons/prison-and-yoi