Criminal Justice statistics quarterly: Year ending March 2026
Description
Trends in the use of out of court disposals, defendants prosecuted, offenders convicted, remand and sentencing decisions in England and Wales.These tables accompany the Accredited Official Statistics bulletin Criminal Justice Statistics quarterly: March 2026.https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/criminal-justice-system-statistics-quarterly-March-2026
Properties
Not applicable values are replaced with the value '[z]'.Not available values are replaced with the value '[x]'.
Contact
The coverage of police recorded crime figures is defined by the Notifiable Offence List, found at the following link. Where stated, court statistics are presented on a similar all-offence, notifiable-only basis for effective comparison. https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/counting-rules-for-recorded-crimeFurther information on police recorded crime can be found at the following link. Figures provided are derived from table A4a. https://www.ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/crimeandjustice/datasets/crimeinenglandandwalesappendixtablesFurther information on charges can be found at the following link. Figures provided are derived from the 'Outcomes open data' for the relevant time period. https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/police-recorded-crime-open-data-tablesPress enquiries should be directed to the Ministry of Justice press office: Tel: 020 3334 3536. https://www.gov.uk/government/organisations/ministry-of-justice/about/media-enquiriesOther enquiries about these statistics should be directed to the Courts and People Data and Statistics unit of the Ministry of Justice: Email: CJS_Statistics@justice.gov.uk
Next update:
October 2026
Notes
This worksheet contains one table.
Note number Note text
[note 1] Ahead of the 2023 Q2 CJSQ publication, work was undertaken to develop the processing of criminal court outcome data. As a result, figures from 2017 onwards were revised using more accurate and reliable data processing methods. We advise users to apply caution when comparing trends from 2017 onward with those from earlier periods. For further details, please refer to the technical appendix published alongside the 2023 Q2 report (https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/media/65bd02dd63a23d0013c8213a/criminal-justice-statistics-technical-appendix-june-2023.pdf).
[note 2] Offence groupings are continually revised using the Offence Group Classification published alongside this report to reflect offences accurately. Therefore users should exercise caution when comparing these figures to those previously published.
[note 3] It is not advised to use this data to calculate conviction rate (the number of convictions as a proportion of total prosecutions). This is due to the Court Proceedings Database counting two separate records at two separate stages (one at magistrates' court, one at Crown Court). An individual may be convicted in a different year from when they were initially prosecuted, or the principal offence may differ between these stages. As a result, this rate is not an accurate measure of the proportion of prosecutions that result in a conviction.
[note 4] These figures are presented on a principal-offence basis - ie. reporting information relating to the most serious offence that a defendant was dealt with for. When a defendant has been found guilty of two or more offences it is the offence for which the heaviest penalty is imposed. Where the same disposal is imposed for two or more offences, the offence selected is the offence for which the statutory maximum penalty is the most severe.
[note 5] Offences dealt with at magistrates’ court and subsequently committed to the Crown Court for trial or sentence are counted separately at each stage of the process, based on the year in which they receive an outcome at each respective court. For example, an offence committed from the magistrates’ court in 2022 may not receive a final outcome at the Crown Court until a subsequent year, meaning the prosecution and conviction are counted separately in different years. As a result, the number of convictions (or other outcomes) in a given year may exceed the number of prosecutions. Similarly, an offence convicted in one year may be sentenced the following year, meaning that the number of sentences issued may not match the number of convictions in any given year.
[note 6] Some police forces have moved to reduce the types of out of court disposals used for adult offenders. In these areas, the only out of court disposals used are community resolutions and conditional cautions. Cannabis/Khat warnings will not be used.
[note 7] Cannabis warnings will include a small number of khat warnings which were introduced from 24 December 2014. Totals exclude a small number of cannabis warnings erroneously recorded against non-drug-related offences which may be revised in future quarters.
[note 8] Outcomes data for those given cannabis/khat warnings and community resolutions are not publicly available by quarterly totals to calculate years ending June or September, prior to the years ending June and September 2015.
[note 9] The category ‘other resolutions’ includes penalty notes for disorder (notifable only in table Q1_2) and cannabis/khat warnings.
[note 10] Indictable only offences are the most serious and must be dealt with at the Crown Court; summary offences are the least serious and must be heard at magistrates’ courts; and triable-either-way offences are of intermediate severity and may be dealt with at either court based on the circumstances of the case. Indictable only and triable-either-way offences are often refered to collectively as 'Indictable'. See accompanying technical guide for further details.
[note 11] These figures are presented on a principal-disposal basis - i.e. reporting the most severe outcome issued for the offence.
[note 12] Immediate custody includes detention in a Young Offender Institution, detention and training orders and all other sentences of imprisonment.
[note 13] Community sentences includes disposals such as curfew orders, community punishment orders, rehabilitation orders, community service, reparation orders, drug treatment orders and other community orders.
[note 14] Other disposals' includes absolute discharge, conditional discharge and otherwise dealt with (see note 26 for details).
[note 15] Average Custodial Sentence Length (ACSL) is calculated by dividing the total combined custodial sentence length (in months) imposed by the number of offenders sentenced to immediate custody. This calculation excludes life sentences, other indeterminate sentences, custodial sentences recorded as 60 years or more (which are assumed to be administrative errors) and custodial sentences where the sentence length is unknown.
[note 16] Offenders admitted into prison as a result of being issued an immediate custodial sentence at court (excluding fine defaulters).
[note 17] Offenders starting a Community Order or Suspended Sentence Order with requirements.
[note 18] Notifiable offences include all offences that could possibly be tried by jury (these include some less serious offences, such as minor theft that would not usually be dealt with this way) plus a few additional closely related offences, such as assault without injury.
[note 19] The Home Office collates and publishes recorded crime data supplied by the 43 territorial police forces of England and Wales, plus the British Transport police.
[note 20] Following the implementation of a new IT system, Greater Manchester Police were unable to supply outcomes data from July 2019 to March 2020.  Greater Manchester are excluded from crime outcomes (including charges, OOCDS and TICS ) in tables Q1.1 and Q1.2 so comparison can be made between the years (as they were both missing for different periods).
[note 21] Excluding fraud offences. Crime figures are shown excluding fraud offences to allow for consistent comparisons. There was a staggered move of recording fraud offences from forces to Action Fraud between April 2011 and March 2013.
[note 22] Figures for cautions, prosecutions and convictions in this table are presented on all offence basis - i.e. including all offences that a defendant was dealth with for (principal offences plus non-principal offences). Therefore, the same defendant may account for multiple records within the totals. This differs to the principal offence basis used in most other tables for police cautions and criminal court data.
[note 23] Taken into Consideration (TIC): The offender admits the crime by way of a formal police interview and asks for it to be taken into consideration by the court. There must be an interview where the suspect has made a clear and reliable admission of the offence, and which is corroborated with additional verifiable auditable information connecting the suspect to the crime.
[note 24] Following an internal review, the Metropolitan Police has had controls in place since December 2014 which have limited the activity which might result in offences being taken into consideration (TIC).
[note 25] Discharged includes both conditional and absolute discharges.
[note 26] Otherwise dealt with on finding of guilty includes disposals such as one day in police cells, disqualification ordesr, restraining orders, confiscation orders, travel restriction orders, disqualification from driving, hospital orders, guardianship orders, recommendation for deportation and other disposals.
[note 27] Custody rate reflects the percentage of offenders that received an immediate custodial sentence. It is calculated by dividing the number of offenders issued an immediate custodial sentence, by the total number of offenders sentenced. Custody rate is not reported if fewer than five offenders were sentenced (based on any filters applied).
[note 28] Offence added with effect from 24 December 2014.
[note 29] The cautions data provided has been drawn from an extract of the Police National Computer (PNC) data held by the MoJ. The PNC holds details of all convictions and cautions given for recordable offences. As with any large scale recording system, the PNC is subject to possible errors with data entry and processing so data provided previously may be subject to revision.
[note 30] These figures are presented on a principal-offence basis - i.e. reporting information relating to the most serious offence that an offender was cautioned for on a given occasion.
[note 31] Cautions issued for motoring offences are not held centrally. Summary motoring offences are typically addressed through Fixed Penalty Notices when dealt with out of court. These are not included in this table.
[note 32] The cautioning rate represents the percentage of offenders (those either cautioned or convicted, excluding motoring offences) who received a caution.
[note 33] Youth courts are categorised as magistrates' courts in the Courts Proceedings Database. This will impact the figures for indictable-only offences being dealt with at the magistrates' court, which will include a high volume of juveniles.
[note 34] Excludes offenders that were committed for sentence from the magistrates' court.
[note 35] The category ‘Other disposal without conviction’ captures disposals issued to defendants despite having not been convicted. This includes disposals such as hospital orders, restraining orders and sexual harm prevention orders issued without conviction/on acquittal. This also includes outcomes such as a defendant being found unfit to plead and admitted to hospital.
[note 36] Defendants are reported against their most serious remand status recorded at a court hearing (excluding their status recorded post-sentencing hearing as this reflects the outcome of the sentence rather than a remand decision). A defendant’s remand status may change several times throughout their court journey, however only the most serious status during that period is reported and this does not reflect the number of remand decisions made.
[note 37] Includes those remanded in custody by the police following an arrest who may also have subsequently been granted bail by the police and those initially bailed by the police who were subsequently re-arrested and held in custody.
[note 38] The not applicable/unknown category for remand status prior to appearing at court includes cases where the defendant is not arrested by the Police and is instead summonsed to appear at court by a prosecuting authority other than the Police/CPS, meaning no remand decision is applicable. Unknown remand status accounts for a low volume of this category.
[note 39] The not applicable/unknown category for remand status at magistrates’ court includes cases that are dealt with outside of court, such as Single Justice Procedure cases, or dealt with at a single court hearing, meaning no remand decision is required. Unknown remand status accounts for a low volume of this category.
[note 40] Defendants proceeded against at magistrates’ court and subsequently committed to the Crown Court for trial or sentence will have separate remand decisions made in both courts and will be included in both totals. These defendants may therefore be double counted in this table, appearing in both totals.
[note 41] Magistrates' court records with a committed to the Crown Court outcome are excluded from this table to avoid double counting defendants that appear at both courts. These defendants are therefore reported against their Crown Court remand status and outcome in this table.
[note 42] Ambiguity in the status of small business owners can occasionally lead to defendants that were recorded as a company being prosecuted for offences not typically associated with companies, or receiving disposals only available to people, such as community or custodial sentences.
[note 43] Report Fraud, a new national fraud and cybercrime reporting system, was launched by the City of London Police (CoLP) on 4 December 2025 to replace Action Fraud and the National Fraud Intelligence Bureau (NFIB). The new system will improve the quality, consistency and transparency of fraud and cybercrime data.The Home Office and ONS have agreed that while the CoLP is fully transitioning to using this new system that they can temporarily suspend their supply of recorded cybercrime and fraud data, whilst a number of components are delivered. This is to enable the CoLP to give priority to aligning the legacy Action Fraud data against Report Fraud to ensure consistency whilst also improving the experience for victims reporting cybercrime and fraud incidents and providing essential information needed for the police to manage investigations. Therefore, recorded cybercrime and fraud data are not presented in the latest year.