Prison Population annual: data to 30 June 2026
Publication details
These tables are published as part of the 'Offender Management Statistics Quarterly' publication by the Ministry of Justice.
Link to 'Offender Management Statistics Quarterly' (opens in a new window)
Definitions and measurements
Further details of the terminology used to report prison population statistics can be found in the definitions section for population in the 'Guide to Offender Management Statistics' published alongside these tables.
Geographic coverage
All tables are for England and Wales.
Data sources
The majority of the figures in these tables are drawn from the Prison National Offender Management Information System (Prison NOMIS) and Digital Prisons Services (DPS). Any additional data sources are listed above the relevant tables.
Data quality
The figures in these tables have been drawn from administrative IT systems which, as with any large-scale recording system, are subject to possible errors with data entry and processing.
Occasionally we identify issues with previously published figures. Revised figures will be marked with [rev]. A revised marker in a column heading indicates that some or all of the values in that column have been updated.
Data quality improvement work in 2023 to 2025 may have resulted in small unmarked changes to previously published figures.
Symbols used
[x] Not available
[c] Confidential (disclosure control)
[z] Not applicable
[rev] Revised figure(s)
Percentage changes
A [z] symbol has been used in cases with one (or both) comparator value(s) less than 50.
Use of notes
Some tables refer to notes. When notes are mentioned, the note marker is presented in square brackets. The note text can be found in the 'Notes' table.
Disclosure control
Where necessary, [c] has been used to suppress values of one or two to prevent the disclosure of individual information. Further disclosure control may be completed where this alone is not sufficient. This could include the secondary suppression of zero values. Disclosure control is also applied to breakdowns by prison for any prison with a population of fewer than 100.
Publication schedule
This release was published on Thursday 30 July 2026 at 9:30am, and covers prison population data for the year to 30 June 2026.
The next annual release will be published on Thursday 29 July 2027 at 9:30am, and will cover prison population data for the year to 2027.
Offender Management Statistics Quarterly is released every three months on the last working Thursday of January, April, July, and October.
Additional resources
Information about establishment predominant function and designation is published by HM Prison and Probation Service in 'Prisons and their resettlement providers'.
Link to 'Prisons and their resettlement providers' (opens in a new window)
Information about the youth estate is available in 'Youth justice statistics' and the 'Youth custody report'.
Link to 'Youth justice statistics' (opens in a new window)
Link to 'Youth custody report' (opens in a new window)
Media enquiries
Contact information for media enquiries can be found on the GOV.UK website.
Link to 'GOV.UK media enquiries' (opens in a new window)
Non-media enquiries
Email: OMSQ-SiC-publications@justice.gov.uk
Copyright
Crown copyright (produced by the Ministry of Justice)
Notes
This worksheet contains one table.
Link to Contents tab
Note Description
[note 1] The prison population annual average is the average of the 12 month end prison populations.
[note 2] On 30 June 2015, 130 prisoners whose ethnic group is recorded as Chinese have moved from the ‘Chinese or other ethnic group’ category to the ‘Asian/Asian British’ category, and the group renamed to ‘Other ethnic group’.
[note 3] On 30 June 2015, 350 prisoners who were previously recorded in the other religious group will now be included in the other Christian category.
[note 4] As part of wider ongoing data improvement work, and following consultation with operational colleagues, the prisoner religion / belief codes have been streamlined to facilitate more accurate data entry and initial processing. These changes occured in June 2025 and and resulted in a number of prisoners moving between religion / belief groups. Therefore, figures before 30 June 2025 are not fully consistent with or comparable to figures for or after 30 June 2025.
[note 5] From 30 June 2015, prison population by nationality has been published on prisoner’s nationality rather than country, for example, French rather than France.
[note 6] Morton Hall closed as an IRC in July 2021, and was reopened as a prison in December 2021.
[note 7] The Verne closed as an IRC in December 2017, and was reopened as a prison in August 2018.
[note 8] Dover IRC closed in November 2015.
[note 9] Life (all variations) includes mandatory, discretionary, and automatic life sentences as well as those relating to young adults and juveniles held in prison custody.
[note 10] 'Tariff not recorded' includes cases where a confirmed tariff expiry date has yet to be received, and any unmatched records.
[note 11] Tariff length is the time between date of sentencing and tariff expiry date, and does not take into account any time served on remand.
[note 12] Figures exclude recallees.
[note 13] 'Other life sentence' includes discretionary and automatic life sentences.
[note 14] The figures for Secure Children's Homes and Secure Training Centres may not match the monthly custody figures within the 'Youth custody data' publication (link on the cover page). This is due to different methodologies and snapshot dates.