Prison Licence Recalls: January to March 2024
Publication details
These tables are published as part of the 'Offender Management Statistics Quarterly' publication by the Ministry of Justice.
Link to 'Offender Management Statistics Quarterly' (opens in a new window)
Definitions and measurements
Further details of the terminology used to report prison population statistics can be found in the definitions section for population in the 'Guide to Offender Management Statistics' published alongside these tables.
Geographic coverage
All tables are for England and Wales.
Data sources
The figures in these tables are drawn from the Public Protection Unit Database (PPUD).
Data quality
The figures in these tables have been drawn from administrative IT systems which, as with any large scale recording system, are subject to possible errors with data entry and processing.
Symbols used
[x] Not available
[c] Confidential (disclosure control)
[rev] Revision
[z] Not applicable
Use of notes
Some tables refer to notes. When notes are mentioned, the note marker is presented in square brackets. The note text can be found in the 'Notes' table.
Disclosure control
Where necessary, [c] has been used to suppress values of one or two to prevent the disclosure of individual information. Further disclosure control may be completed where this alone is not sufficient.
Publication schedule
This release was published on Thursday 25 July 2024 at 9:30am, covering the quarter January to March 2024.
The next quarterly release will be published on Thursday 26 September 2024 at 9:30am, and will cover the quarter April to June 2024.
Offender Management Statistics Quarterly is released every three months on the last working Thursday of January, April, July, and October.
Media enquiries
Contact information for media enquiries can be found on the GOV.UK website.
Link to 'GOV.UK media enquiries' (opens in a new window)
Non-media enquiries
Email: OMSQ-SiC-publications@justice.gov.uk
Copyright
Crown copyright Produced by the Ministry of Justice
Notes
This worksheet contains one table.
Link to Contents tab
Note Description
[note 1] HDC recalls refer to recalls during home detention curfew period
[note 2] In June 2021, Community Rehabilitation Companies (CRCs) were combined with the National Probation Service (NPS) into one Probation Service (PS). We use "Probation service" to refer both NPS and PS.
[note 3] Regional grouping under the new Probation Service replaces the old regional grouping.
[note 4] There is an emergency process for all indeterminate recalls.
[note 5] Offenders are returned in target time if the end-to-end process takes less than 74 hours for emergency process recalls and less than 144 hours (6 days) for standard process recalls.
[note 6] Probation Trusts were replaced with National Probation Serivce/Community Rehabilitation Companies before the Offender Rehabilitation Act 2014 introduced recalls for sentences of less than 12 months.
[note 7] From June 2021, classification of offences is based on Home Office's counting rules for recorded crime.
Home Office counting rules for recorded crime -data.gov.uk
[note 8] Recall reasons do not sum to the total number of recalls as more than one reason can be recorded against each recall.
[note 9] Some reasons previously included in the 'other' category started to be published separately from July-September 2018. As a result, the 'other' category from this time onwards is not comparable with previous figures.
[rev] The figures for recall reasons are revised for January-March 2023. In the previous publications, figures were wrongly updated for January-March 2023.