Cover page
HMPPS Recruitment diversity statistics, June 2026
Date
2026-06-30 00:00:00
Published
2026-08-20 00:00:00
Next release
18 Febraury 2027
Press enquiries
Press enquiries should be directed to the Ministry of Justice press office: https://www.gov.uk/government/organisations/ministry-of-justice/about/media-enquiries
Other enquiries
Other enquiries about these statistics should be directed to: Email: robert.hartley@justice.gov.uk
Important note
Every effort is made to ensure that the figures presented are accurate and complete. However, it is important to note that the data have been drawn from large scale administrative systems and as such are subject to possible errors with data entry and processing.
Symbols and conventions
The following symbols have been used throughout the tables in this bulletin:
.. denotes data not available. There will be large changes to the number of candidates for the stages after application when more information on these applications have been collected and included in future bulletins. This updated data may lead to significant changes in the proportions and relative rate index values of some of the groups. For this reason, figures for the stages after application for the latest two quarters have not be shown.
[p] Provisional data. As some candidates are still working their way through the recruitment pipeline, numbers relating to recent quarters will be updated in future publications to reflect candidates’ further progress.
~ denotes suppressed values of 2 or fewer or other values which would allow values of 2 or fewer to be derived by subtraction. Low numbers are suppressed to prevent disclosure in accordance with the Data Protection Act, 2018.
* percentage suppressed due to small numbers. Where small numbers are present, percentages are highly volatile and potentially misleading.
- not applicable
** denotes RRI figures statistically significant (Overall RRIs using Chi2 test, p<0.05. Other RRI using 4/5th rule).
Publication details
These tables are published as part of the Her Majesty’s Prison and Probation Service workforce quarterly by the Ministry of Justice. This is available online at:
https://www.gov.uk/government/collections/national-offender-management-service-workforce-statistics
This release was published on 20 August at 9:30am, and covers the 12-months ending June 2026.
Notes
This worksheet contains one table
Note number Note
[1] These tables use a cohort approach with the progress of people through all later stages of the recruitment process shown in the quarter the candidate applied in, regardless of when the subsequent stages happened.
[2] Application statuses as at the end of June 2026
[3] Percent of candidates/applications, excluding those in 'Not known / Prefer not to say' category.
[4] 'Self-reporting rate' refers to the percentage of staff who have reported the relevant personal characteristic out of the total number of staff. This is a measure of coverage and uncertainty due to candidates who have not reported or indicated that they do not wish to report. This excludes individuals who did not provide a response or stated that they would prefer not to report this information.
[5] The Relative Rate Index (RRI) is a widely used measure, as used in the Lammy Review, which measures disparity in the success rates from application between groups in a standardised, comparable way - a value of 1 indicates no disparity, further from 1 in either direction indicates increasing levels of disparity.
[6] These tables use a staged approach with each stage of the application processes being recorded in the quarter that it took place even if that is not the same as the quarter of the initial application.
[7] Only prison officer and youth justice worker recruitment at Band 3 (including the OSG to Prison Officer/ Youth Justice Worker Fast Track, Advance into Justice, and Returners Scheme) is included. Prison officer recruitment at other bands are internal promotions, so are excluded. There is incomplete information on the Oleeo and Avature recruitment systems about the Unlocked Graduate Scheme as this is externally managed, so this scheme is not included in the data.
[p] Provisional data. As some candidates/applications are still working their way through the recruitment pipeline, numbers relating to recent quarters will be updated in future publications to reflect candidates’ further progress.
- Not applicable
.. There will be large changes to the number of candidates for the stages after application when more information on these applications have been collected and included in future bulletins. This updated data may lead to significant changes in the proportions and relative rate index values of some of the groups. For this reason, figures for the stages after application for the latest two quarters have not be shown.
** RRI figures statistically significant (p<0.05)