Prison Releases: January to March 2024
Publication details
These tables are published as part of the 'Offender Management Statistics Quarterly' publication by the Ministry of Justice.
Link to 'Offender Management Statistics Quarterly' (opens in a new window)
Definitions and measurements
Further details of the terminology used to report prison releases statistics can be found in the definitions section for releases in the 'Guide to Offender Management Statistics' published alongside these tables.
Geographic coverage
All tables are for England and Wales.
Data sources
The majority of the figures in these tables are drawn from the Prison National Offender Management Information System (Prison NOMIS). Any additional data sources are listed above the relevant tables.
Data quality
The figures in these tables have been drawn from administrative IT systems which, as with any large scale recording system, are subject to possible errors with data entry and processing.
Occasionally we identify issues with previously published figures. Revised figures will be marked with [rev]. A revised marker in a column heading indicates that some or all of the values in that column have been updated.
Data quality improvement work in 2023 to 2024 may have resulted in small unmarked changes to previously published figures.
Symbols used
[x] Not available
[c] Confidential (disclosure control)
[z] Not applicable
[rev] Revised figure(s)
Percentage changes
A [z] symbol has been used in cases with one (or both) comparator value(s) less than 50.
Use of notes
Some tables refer to notes. When notes are mentioned, the note marker is presented in square brackets. The note text can be found in the 'Notes' table.
Disclosure control
Where necessary, [c] has been used to suppress values of one or two to prevent the disclosure of individual information. Further disclosure control may be completed where this alone is not sufficient.
Publication schedule
This release was published on Thursday 25 July 2024 at 9:30am, and covers prison releases data for the quarter January to March 2024.
The next quarterly release will be published on Thursday 31 October 2024 at 9:30am, and will cover prison releases data for the quarter April to June 2024.
Offender Management Statistics Quarterly is released every three months on the last working Thursday of January, April, July, and October.
Additional resources
Information about establishment predominant function and designation is published by HM Prison and Probation Service in 'Prisons and their resettlement providers'.
Link to 'Prisons and their resettlement providers' (opens in a new window)
Information about the youth estate is available in 'Youth justice statistics' and the 'Youth custody report'.
Link to 'Youth justice statistics' (opens in a new window)
Link to 'Youth custody report' (opens in a new window)
Media enquiries
Contact information for media enquiries can be found on the GOV.UK website.
Link to 'GOV.UK media enquiries' (opens in a new window)
Non-media enquiries
Email: OMSQ-SiC-publications@justice.gov.uk
Copyright
Crown copyright Produced by the Ministry of Justice
Notes
This worksheet contains one table.
Link to Contents tab
Note Description
[note 1] A release is defined as a release from prison where the prisoner has finished serving the custodial term of their sentence(s) and excludes: civil non-criminal prisoners; persons committed to custody for non-payment of a fine; releases to hospital; releases following recall after release on licence, except where the offender has committed a new offence and is committed to custody for a new sentence and the subsequent release date falls after the sentence expiry date of the original sentence, or where upon release the offender is subject to the licence condition of the new custodial sentence.
[note 2] As released indeterminate prisoners are subject to a licence which remains in force for the duration of their natural life all indeterminate releases reported will be first releases.
[note 3] The time served including remand is calculated as the difference between the date of initial entry to prison and the date of release. For offenders who are bailed as part of the pre-sentence process this can include time in the community: for example, for an individual who is held on untried remand and is then bailed between conviction and sentencing, the 'time served' presented here will include their time on bail. Similarly, for individuals who are bailed but then breach their bail conditions and are then remanded into custody, their 'time served' may include their time on bail. As such, these figures represent an approximation (overestimate) of time served in prison and on occasion the average time served figure may appear greater than the average sentence length figure.
[note 4] This is the number of offenders within their HDC eligibility window serving sentences of between 12 weeks and just under 4 years and therefore potentially eligible for release on Home Detention Curfew (HDC) in the relevant period. It includes offenders who are in fact statutorily ineligible for HDC, such as registered sex offenders or those with a previous recall for breach of curfew on HDC (prisoners not eligible for HDC for these reasons cannot be identified from the data that is held). Moreover, certain offenders are presumed unsuitable for HDC and will only be considered for release in exceptional circumstances.
[note 5] An offender may be eligible for release on HDC in more than one quarter. Users should therefore not sum four quarters worth of data for the annual number of prisoners released. Annual figures are provided in the annual releases tables, typically published in April of each year.
[note 6] A [z] symbol has been used in cases with one (or both) comparator value(s) less than 50.
[note 7] The population figures are as of the last working Friday in the period.
[note 8] The data in this table is produced by matching HDC releases data against recall data in order to get the figures for HDC recalls. Because an HDC release can be recalled within 180 days of HDC release, recalls could occur up to two quarters after the release quarter.
[note 9] Recall reasons give the number of individuals within the three recall reasons groupings. As a recall might have more than one reason for being recalled, the total of recall reasons do not sum to the total number of recalls as more than one reason can be recorded against each recall.
[note 10] Custody type is based on the prisoner’s custody type at the point of their first ROTL of the quarter.
[note 11] One individual may be released on temporary licence in more than one quarter of the year. Users should therefore not sum four quartersworth of data for the annual number of prisoners released on temporary licence. Annual figures are provided in the annual releases tables, typically published in April of each year.
[note 12] The 'other sentence type' category includes fine defaulters and non-criminal prisoners.
[note 13] Not all temporary release failures are recorded on central administrative systems. Those that are not recorded centrally are more likely to be low-level failures including, for example, returning with unauthorised possessions and failing alcohol meter.
[note 14] One individual may be transferred in the prison estate in more than one quarter of the year. Users should therefore not sum four quarters worth of data for the annual number of prisoners transferred. Annual figures are provided in the annual releases tables, typically published in April of each year.