Safety in Custody - Summary Tables
Self-harm and assaults to March 2026
Deaths in prison custody to June 2026
Publication details
These tables are published as part of the Safety in Custody Statistics Bulletin
For the main report please go to:
https://www.gov.uk/government/collections/safety-in-custody-statistics (opens in new window)
Geographic coverage
All tables are for England and Wales.
Data sources and quality
Deaths figures are derived from the HMPPS Deaths in Prison Custody database.  As classification of deaths may change following inquest or as new information emerges, numbers may change from time to time.
Figures for assaults and self-harm have been drawn from the HMPPS Incident Reporting System.  Care is taken when processing and analysing returns but the detail is subject to the inaccuracies inherent in any large scale recording system. Although shown to the last case, the figures may not be accurate to that level.
Symbols and conventions
[..] Figures suppressed due to 2 or less incidents
[0] Nil or less than half the final digit shown
[-] Not applicable
[~] Not applicable - youth estate
(p) Provisional data
(r) Revised data
Use of notes
Some tables refer to notes. When notes are mentioned, the note marker is presented in square brackets. The note text can be found in the 'Notes' table.
Publication schedule
This release was published on Thursday 30 July 2026 at 9:30am.
The next quarterly release will be published on Thursday 29 October 2026 at 9:30am.
Additional resources
Figures include incidents at HMPPS operated Immigration Removal Centres and during contracted out escorts (including contracted out escort of prisoners from STC's).  Figures do not include incidents at Medway STC. For more information on Secure Training Centres, please see Youth justice annual statistics via the following link:
https://www.gov.uk/government/collections/youth-justice-annual-statistics (opens in a new window)
Self-harm figures from April 2019 onwards and assaults figures from April 2018 onwards exclude incidents occurring within the youth estate. Figures for incidents occurring within the youth estate are published within the ‘Safety in the children and young people secure estate’ statistics bulletin via the following link:
https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/safety-in-the-children-and-young-people-secure-estate-update-to-december-2025 (opens in new window)
For additional information on prisons, see the latest HM Inspector of Prisons inspection reports via the following link:
https://hmiprisons.justiceinspectorates.gov.uk/our-reports (opens in new window)
Media enquiries
Contact information for media enquiries can be found on the GOV.UK website via the following link:
https://www.gov.uk/government/organisations/ministry-of-justice/about/media-enquiries (opens in new window)
Copyright
Crown copyright Produced by the Ministry of Justice
Notes 
This worksheet contains one table.
Link to Contents tab
General Notes
Figures include incidents at HMPPS operated Immigration Removal Centres and during contracted out escorts (including contracted out escort of prisoners from STCs).
Figures do not include incidents at Medway STC.
Caution is strongly urged against consideration of monthly trends. Monthly figures have high volatility and are susceptible to seasonal effects. The most appropriate way to  consider trends is on a 12 month basis.
Note Note Text
[note 1] Deaths in prison custody figures include all deaths of prisoners arising from incidents during prison custody.  They include deaths of prisoners while released on temporary license (ROTL) for medical reasons but exclude other types of ROTL where the state has less direct responsibility. The figures include the youth estate across all years.
[note 2] All classifications of deaths remain provisional until confirmed at inquest.
[note 3] Apparent cause is based on the HMPPS classification of deaths in prison custody. The self-inflicted deaths category includes a wider range of deaths than suicides. Similarly, the homicide category includes a wider range of deaths than murder.
[note 4] ‘Other’ deaths include accidental and other difficult to classify deaths including those for which further information is awaited.
[note 5] A proportion of the most recent two years' figures for 'other' deaths are expected to be re-classified as natural causes or self-inflicted deaths.
[note 6] In the case of drug related deaths where no intent to self-harm has been discovered, the death has been classified as “Other: Non-natural”.
[note 7] Some figures have been revised based on the reclassification of deaths - mainly in the 'other' category. Annual tables will be revised to reflect in year changes in the following annual release.
[note 8] Self-harm figures from April 2019 onwards and assaults figures from April 2018 onwards exclude incidents occurring within the youth estate, so these years are not comparable with the years before or after, due to youth estate incidents being included in part of the year, from January to April. The youth estate includes incidents occurring within Cookham Wood (up to July 2024, after which it changed to Category C), Werrington and Wetherby, as well as the youth wing at Feltham and Parc. Prior to then these figures were collected via manual returns, so it is not possible to split out all youth estate incidents up to March 2019 for self-harm and up to March 2018 for assaults.
[note 9] In prisons, as in the community, it is not possible to count self-harm incidents with absolute accuracy. In prison custody, however, such incidents are more likely to be detected and counted. Care needs to be taken when comparing figures shown here with other sources where data may be less complete.
[note 10] Numbers of individuals should be treated as approximate, as the details of prisoners are not always recorded against each self-harm incident.
[note 11] The hospital attendances in this table refer to those arising immediately from self-harm incidents. They do not include any subsequent hospital visits that may be required to continue treatment. An incident of self-harm requiring hospitalisation does not only reflect the seriousness of the incident. This also depends on the healthcare facilities at the establishment, which vary across the estate.
[note 12] A new Key Performance Indicator for serious assaults was introduced in 2003/04 and as a result reporting of all assault incidents improved. Reported incidents before 2005 are therefore not directly comparable with later figures. In particular, although figures for 2000 to 2002 have been included they are under reported by modern standards.  It is now expected that all assaults, including fights, should be reported whether or not there was an injury.  As this was not the case in the past care needs to be taken when interpreting changes over the years.
[note 13] Prisoner-on-prisoner assaults are a subset of all assault incidents.
[note 14] Assaults on staff are a subset of all assault incidents. Some assault incidents may be recorded as both a prisoner-on-prisoner assault and an assault on staff, so the sum of the two categories may exceed the total number of assaults
[note 15] Sex refers to the type of establishment. In general, the recorded sex of the people will be the same as the type of establishment. Figures relating to the number of prisoners in the male or female estate may not reflect the recorded sex of the prisoner. Incidents occurring within escort areas are based on the recorded sex of the prisoner.
[note 16] Rises or falls in numbers of assault incidents from one year to the next may not be a good indicator of underlying trend.  This table should be read in conjunction with table 10 which outlines some of the major changes to prisons that will have affected numbers of incidents.  In addition to these changes some prisons may have opened new wings/house blocks or closed others for refurbishment.  These are not listed but often explain large increases or decreases from one year to the next.
[note 17] The sum of serious prisoner-on-prisoner assaults and serious assaults on staff may not equal the total number of serious assaults because staff may be assaulted in a prisoner-on-prisoner assault incident and other assault incidents may involve other people, e.g. visitors.
[note 18] Q1 denotes 3 months ending March and similarly Q2 June, Q3 September and Q4 December.
[note 19] HMP Birmingham was a contracted prison for part of the period of this report. The formal transfer of the prison to the public sector (HMPPS) took place on 1 July 2019. HMP Lowdham Grange similarly changed from contracted to public in August 2024.
[note 20] The list here shows years of opening/closing and major re-roles of establishments. However, prisons are constantly evolving as new wings open and old ones close for refurbishment.  Even a relatively minor change in a prison has the potential to affect the distribution of safer custody risk, for example, the opening or closing of a special unit.  When interpreting figures for particular establishments there is no substitute for knowledge of local factors likely to affect the distribution of risk.