Safety in Custody Statistics: Self-harm annual tables, 2004 - 2025
Publication details
These tables are published as part of the Safety in Custody Statistics Bulletin
For the main report please go to:
https://www.gov.uk/government/collections/safety-in-custody-statistics (opens in new window)
Geographical coverage:
All tables are for England and Wales.
Data sources and quality:
These figures have been drawn from the HMPPS Incident Reporting System. Care is taken when processing and analysing the returns but the detail collected is subject to the inaccuracies inherent in any large scale recording system. Although the figures are shown to the last case (for incidents) or to the last individual, the figures may not be accurate to that level.
Symbols and conventions
[..] Figures suppressed due to 2 or less incidents. Additional cells have also been suppressed to prevent the calculation of suppressed values. As a result, totals may not equal the sum of individual cells.
[0] Nil or less than half the final digit shown
[-] Not applicable
(p) Provisional data
(r) Revised data
Use of notes
Some tables refer to notes. When notes are mentioned, the note marker is presented in square brackets. The note text can be found in the 'Notes' table.
Publication schedule
This release was published on Thursday 30 April 2026 at 9:30am.
Publication of 2026 figures will be in April 2027. Provisional quarterly updates are published in July, October and January.
Additional resources
Figures include incidents at HMPPS operated Immigration Removal Centres and during contracted out escorts (including contracted out escort of prisoners from STCs). Figures do not include incidents at Medway STC. For more information on Secure Training Centres, please see Youth justice annual statistics via the following link:
https://www.gov.uk/government/collections/youth-justice-statistics (opens in new window)
Figures from April 2019 onwards exclude incidents occurring within the youth estate. Figures for incidents occurring within the youth estate are published within the ‘Safety in the Children and Young People Secure Estate’ statistics bulletin via the following link:
https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/safety-in-the-children-and-young-people-secure-estate-update-to-december-2020 (opens in new window)
For additional information on prisons, see the latest HM Inspector of Prisons inspection reports via the following link:
http://www.justice.gov.uk/publications/inspectorate-reports/hmi-prisons/prison-and-yoi (opens in new window)
Media enquiries
Contact information for media enquiries can be found on the GOV.UK website via the following link:
https://www.gov.uk/government/organisations/ministry-of-justice/about/media-enquiries (opens in new window)
Copyright
Crown copyright Produced by the Ministry of Justice
Notes
This worksheet contains one table.
Link to Contents tab
Note number Note text
[note 1] Figures include incidents at HMPPS operated Immigration Removal Centres and during contracted out escorts. Figures do not include incidents at Medway STC.
[note 2] Figures from April 2019 onwards exclude incidents occurring within the youth estate, so figures for 2019 are not comparable with the years before or after, due to youth estate incidents being included in part of the year, from January to April 2019. The youth estate includes incidents occurring within Cookham Wood (up to July 2024, after which it changed to Category C), Werrington and Wetherby, as well as the youth wing at Feltham and Parc. Prior to April 2019 these figures were collected via manual returns, so it is not possible to split out all youth estate incidents up to March 2019. Figures for incidents occurring within the youth estate are published within the ‘Safety in the Children and Young People Secure Estate’ statistics bulletin via the following link - https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/announcements/safety-in-the-youth-secure-estate-bulletin
[note 3] In prisons, as in the community, it is not possible to count self-harm incidents with absolute accuracy. Nor is it possible to identify every individual who self harms. In prison custody, however, such incidents are more likely to be detected and self-harming individuals identified. Care needs to be taken when comparing figures shown here with those from other sources where data may be less complete.
[note 4] Sex refers to the type of establishment. In general, the reported sex of the people self-harming will be the same as the type of establishment. Figures relating to the number of prisoners in the male or female estate may not reflect the reported sex of the prisoner. Incidents occurring within escort areas are based on the reported sex of the prisoner.
[note 5] Self-harm incident rates are derived by 1,000 x (number of incidents in year)/(average monthly population for year). Prison population figures are from the 'Offender Management' statistics quarterly bulletin and are averaged across 12 months.
[note 6] Individuals self-harming rates are derived by 1,000 x (number of individuals in year)/(average monthly population for year). Prison population figures are from the 'Offender Management' statistics quarterly bulletin and are averaged across 12 months.
[note 7] Numbers of individuals should be treated as approximate, as the details of prisoners are not always recorded against each self-harm incident. This can occur for operational reasons if, for some reason, the prisoner details were either not available or not recorded in full at the time of an incident. The process for identifying an individuals between 2004 and 2012 is based on unique combination of surname and date of birth. From 2013, it is based on the unique prisoner number.
[note 8] The hospital attendances in this table refer to those arising immediately from self-harm incidents. They do not include any subsequent hospital visits that may be required to continue treatment. An incident of self-harm requiring hospitalisation does not only reflect the seriousness of the incident. This also depends on the healthcare facilities at the establishment, which vary across the estate.
[note 9] The range of methods are based on choices integrated into IT systems some years ago. The methods recorded are based on initial assessment by prison staff and should not be treated as confirmed clinical diagnoses.
[note 10] From 2013 onwards, the counting rules for method of self-harm is based on responses to a range of questions asked at the time of reporting on the Incident Reporting System, allowing for multiple methods to be associated to a single incident. Prior to this, a hierachical logic was applied to reduce the number of methods associated with an incident to one. Therefore, from 2013 onwards, the sum of the methods categories can exceed the total number of incidents.
[note 11] Prior to April 2020 incidents described as ‘noose: ligature making’ were included. This relates to occasions on which material that was believed to have been fashioned into a noose was seen by staff, but there was no suggestion that it had been placed around the neck or attached to a ligature point, or had any weight or tension applied to it. From April 2020, these have now been excluded, but incidents where there is any suggestion that the noose has been placed around the neck or attached to a ligature point, or had any weight or tension applied to it continue to be included.
[note 12] The "Other" category includes 'head banging', 'ligature making' and 'opening old wounds'. The "Unknown" category, introduced from 2013 onwards with the change in counting rules, includes a small proportion of incidents which are difficult to classify on information provided. Prior to 2013, incidents difficult to classify would be counted within the "Other" category.
[note 13] "Not recorded/unknown" cases arise when self-harm incidents have no prisoner details recorded against them. This can occur for operational reasons if, for some reason, the prisoner details were either not available or not recorded in full at the time of an incident.
[note 14] The numbers in each category are based on how old an individual was when the self-harm incident took place. As a result, individuals may appear in more than one category during a year if they had a birthday since the last incident. There is no unknown category for self-harm individuals, as there are no self-harm incidents where the presence of a prisoner is known but not their age.
[note 15] Figures for the 15-17 age group include incidents by prisoners in the youth estate that occurred within escort areas.
[note 16] The "All ages" total refers to the number of individuals for the year irrespective of their age. Therefore the sum of the categories may not equal the number of individuals.
[note 17] Care needs to be taken when interpreting numbers of self-harm incidents in the early days in the current prison. The number of incidents in a precise 24 hour time slot may not be accurate due to uncertainty in the exact time of incident.
[note 18] The figures in these tables were previously based on the sentence type information for each prisoner as at the time the data was extracted, which in some cases was up to a year after the date of the incident. The methodology for the extract has been improved to now pick up the sentence type information for each prisoner as at the time of the incident, with the update having been applied from 2022 onwards.
[note 19] An indeterminate sentence of Imprisonment for Public Protection (IPP) was introduced in 2005. It was intended for high risk prisoners considered ‘dangerous’ but whose offence did not merit a life sentence. The number of prisoners held on this sentence increased initially and the increase was offset by reductions elsewhere.
[note 20] "Recalls" refers to the total incidents by recalled prisoners, a subset of which were recalled IPP prisoners. This subset has been split out, from 2022 onwards, in the subsequent row ("of which, imprisonment for Public Protection"). Separate to this is the "Imprisonment for Public Protection" subset of "Indeterminate Sentences", which only includes incidents by unreleased IPP prisoners. Therefore, total incidents by IPP prisoners can be calculated by adding together these two subsets.
[note 21] Ethnicity is based on self-reporting by prisoners and has not been independently validated.
[note 22] The numbers in each category are based on the recorded ethnicity of an individual when the self-harm incident took place. As a result, from 2020 onwards, individuals may appear in more than one category during a year.
[note 23] Prior to 2013, those with Chinese ethnicity were counted either in "Asian or Asian British" or "Other" depending on the code selected. Figures have been updated to include Chinese under "Asian or Asian British".
[note 24] The "All Ethnicities" total refers to the number of individuals for the year irrespective of the reported ethnicity. Therefore the sum of the categories may not equal the number of individuals.
[note 25] Nationality is based on self-reporting by prisoners and has not been independently verified. It is based on recorded nationality within the prison administrative system.
[note 26] The numbers in each category are based on the recorded nationality of an individual when the self-harm incident took place. As a result, from 2020 onwards, individuals may appear in more than one category during a year. Prior to 2020, some individuals were classified as "Not recorded/unknown" but this category wasn't presented in the published statistics.
[note 27] The European Economic Area (EEA). For definition of the countries, please see: https://www.gov.uk/eu-eea
[note 28] The "All Nationality Types" total refers to the number of individuals for the year irrespective of the reported nationality. Therefore the sum of the categories may not equal the number of individuals.
[note 29] The range of locations are based on choices integrated into IT systems some years ago. The use and preferred names for some locations such as segregation unit (now care and separation unit) has changed over the years. Such changes may have led to changes in local reporting practices and so care needs to be taken when interpreting changes over time.
[note 30] "Normal" includes non-specialist areas such as cells and common areas.
[note 31] The "Other" category typically refers to locations elsewhere in the prison. It also includes a small proportion of incidents which were difficult to classify on the information provided.
[note 32] The numbers by types of hospital attendances, e.g. "Life support", are drawn from administrative systems. The numbers have not been clinically confirmed and therefore should be interpreted with caution.
[note 33] Most prisoners do not self-harm while in prison custody. Of those that do, over 40% will self-harm just once.
[note 34] The list here shows years of opening/closing and major re-roles of establishments. However, prisons are constantly evolving as new wings open and old ones close for refurbishment. Even a relatively minor change in a prison has the potential to affect the distribution of safer custody risk, for example, the opening or closing of a special unit. When interpreting figures for particular establishments there is no substitute for knowledge of local factors likely to affect the distribution of risk. For additional information on prisons, see the latest HM Inspector of Prisons inspection reports which can be found here: http://www.justice.gov.uk/publications/inspectorate-reports/hmi-prisons/prison-and-yoi